Assignment on Securing Systems for CS50 Cybersecurity
All assignments in CS50 Cybersecurity are out of 10 points. A score of 7 points or better (70%) is required to be considered to have "passed" an assignment in this course. Please do not resubmit an assignment if you have already obtained a passing score--we consider that spam, and if detected, the submission will be deleted, meaning you will not receive the score back anyway. You don't receive a final grade at the end of the course, so it will have no bearing on your certificate, and it will only slow down our graders!

Submitting this assignment more than twice in a single grading cycle constitutes spamming the staff, as well. Upon your third submission, all of your submissions from the current grading cycle are automatically deleted from the system. You will, therefore, not receive any feedback and will need to wait at least three weeks before you submit again.

Unlike CS50x, assignments in this course are graded on a set schedule, and depending on when you submitted, it may take up to three weeks for your work to be graded. Do be patient! Project scores and assignment status on cs50.me/cybersecurity (e.g. "Your submission has been received...") will likely change over time and are not final until the scores have been released.
tresorgoursam@gmail.com Changer de compte
 
Brouillon enregistré
* Indique une question obligatoire
Adresse e-mail
*
tresorgoursam@gmail.com
Name
*
NOUBA-ASRA GOURSAM TRESOR
edX Username
*
NOUBASRATRESOR
What is your GitHub username?
*
If you do not already have a GitHub account, you can sign up for one at https://github.com/join. You can then use this account to log in to cs50.me/cybersecurity to track your progress in the course (your progress will only show up after you have received at least one score release email from CS50 Bot, so do be patient!). Don't worry about seeing a 'No Submissions' message on submit.cs50.io, if you find that. The course collects submissions using Google Forms, and only the gradebook on cs50.me/cybersecurity is important!
Be certain the username you provide is correct! If you provide the wrong username, you will not be able to see your scores. 
Your GitHub username should not be changed while you are taking this course. The current gradebook system is not designed to accommodate name changes.
Be sure to remove extraneous characters, such as an @ prefix. Do not input a URL or email address, just your username.
Freshgeek52
City, State, Country
*
Kigali, Rwanda 
This course is graded by human graders, and has a ZERO TOLERANCE plagiarism and collaboration policy. If *any* of your answers are copied and pasted from, or obviously based on (a) an online source, including non-course-sanctioned generative AI tools or (b) another student's work in the course, in *any* of the course's five assignments or the final project, you will be reported to edX and removed from the course immediately. There is no opportunity for appeal. There are no warnings or second chances.
*
It is far better, we assure you, to leave an answer blank rather than risk it. This may be an online course, but it is offered by Harvard, and we're going to hold you to that standard. The full essence of all work you submit to this course should be your own.
I understand this policy and agree to its terms; I hereby affirm that I will not plagiarize any answers in this course.
SETI@Home
SETI@Home was a distributed-research computing project that largely ran from 1999–2020.

Distributed computing is a network-driven tactic to leverage the processing power of many computers at once to, in this case, analyze radio signals captured from deep space in the hopes that those signals might reveal information about the presence of extraterrestrial life in the universe.
SETI@Home Wallpaper

What type of cybersecurity threat is perhaps most uniquely, given the nature of it, a risk in a research project like SETI@Home, and how might that threat materialize?
1 point
The most uniquely type of cybersecurity that arises in such research project is the creation of a potential botnet for DDoS attack. This threat might materialize by injecting malware that would be able to control these distributed computing network.
What are zero-day attacks and why are they a threat?
1 point
Zero-day are vulnerabilities or weaknesses that is unknown from the developer or the system's vendor. It is called zero-day because the owner has no idea of what it is so they cannot patch it. As it is only known by the attacker, it could be leverage for harmful purpose.
What is port scanning and how is it a threat?
1 point
Port scanning is one of the well-known techniques used to identify open ports in the systems. By open ports, I mean, open services that are running in the system. Port acts as a gateway, a door that helps accessing a given service. It is a threat because malicious people used it to exploit known vulnerabilities that currently run through this service.
What are supercookies? Via what means do we most commonly obtain/receive them, and how do they create threats to our systems?
1 point
Supercookies are tracking tools that go beyond the traditional cookie control. They operate at browser storage, network level, or browser fingerprinting to always monitor users across devices and sessions. They are commonly obtained via ads, set by ISPs, or network administrators. They threatened our systems by enabling undetectable cross-site scripting, reconstructing user's profile even after data deletion - they expose users targeted attacks.
What makes a worm distinct from a virus?
1 point
Worm distinct itself from virus by its ability to self-replicate in the system once launched. When a worm is successfully delivered in a given environment, it starts vulnerability scanning and as soon as it detects one, it spreads across the network and launch without a human intervention.
Provide a technological example of "security through obscurity".
1 point
An example of "security through obscurity" is closed code. Hiding a system's source code.
Distinguish the concepts of SSH and VPN.
1 point
SSH (Secure Shell) provides a secure channel for remote code execution. During communication with the remote server through commands, SSH makes sure, everything is encrypted from your end to the server's end. VPN (Virtual Private Network) in contrast, is private network that furnishes encryption over the internet. It is a secure way of accessing a given server over the internet in order to use a particular resource. ei., videos, images, emails, text files.
What purpose does the X.509 standard serve?
1 point
The X.509 standard serves as the foundation for public key Infrastructure. It defines the format as well as the structure of digital certificates. In the communication realm, it allows one to verify identity based on a key (public key) which is signed by a trusted Certificate Authority (CA). X.509 can help to prevent from man-in-the-middle attack, data tampering and spoofing.
Why might a company want to perform pen testing?
1 point
A company might perform a penetration testing in order to find out potential weaknesses of their system and fix them before a threat actor could actually leverage them more malicious purpose. Pen Testing helps the company to assess its security posture and build an in-depth defensive system.
Of the below HTTP status codes, which most likely suggests that a distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack may be occurring?
1 point
307 Temporary Redirect
429 Too Many Requests
503 Service Unavailable
403 Forbidden
304 Not Modified
404 Not Found
200 OK
